PGD - Upgrade section reorganised and upgrading with TPA section added (#4970)
EnterpriseDB/docs: product_docs/docs/pgd/5/upgrades/manual_overview.mdx

---
title: "Upgrading PGD clusters manually"
---

Because EDB Postgres Distributed consists of multiple software components,
the upgrade strategy depends partially on the components that are being upgraded.

In general, you can upgrade the cluster with almost zero downtime by
using an approach called rolling upgrade. Using this approach, nodes are upgraded one by one, and
the application connections are switched over to already upgraded nodes.

You can also stop all nodes, perform the upgrade on all nodes, and
only then restart the entire cluster. This approach is the same as with a standard PostgreSQL setup.
This strategy of upgrading all nodes at the same time avoids running with
mixed versions of software and therefore is the simplest. However, it incurs

> some downtime and we don't recommend it unless you can't perform the rolling upgrade

Reviewer: Let's be realistic here:
```suggestion
downtime and we don't recommend it unless you can't perform the rolling upgrade
```

for some reason.

To upgrade an EDB Postgres Distributed cluster:

1. Plan the upgrade.
2. Prepare for the upgrade.
3. Upgrade the server software.
4. Check and validate the upgrade.

## Upgrade planning

There are broadly two ways to upgrade each node:

* Upgrade nodes in place to the newer software version. See [Rolling server software upgrades](#rolling-server-software-upgrades).
* Replace nodes with ones that have the newer version installed. See [Rolling upgrade using node join](#rolling-upgrade-using-node-join).

You can use both of these approaches in a rolling manner.

### Rolling upgrade considerations

While the cluster is going through a rolling upgrade, mixed versions of software
are running in the cluster. For example, suppose nodeA has PGD 3.7.16, while
nodeB and nodeC has 4.1.0. In this state, the replication and group
management uses the protocol and features from the oldest version (3.7.16
in this example), so any new features provided by the newer version
that require changes in the protocol are disabled. Once all nodes are
upgraded to the same version, the new features are enabled.

Similarly, when a cluster with WAL-decoder-enabled nodes is going through a

> rolling upgrade, WAL decoder on a higher version of PGD node produces LCRs

Reviewer: As this is the first time we mention it on this page, how about explaining what "LCR" stands for?

Author: ```suggestion
rolling upgrade, WAL decoder on a higher version of PGD node produces LCRs ([logical change records](..//node_management/decoding_worker/#enabling)
```

with a higher pglogical version. WAL decoder on a lower version of PGD node
produces LCRs with lower pglogical version. As a result, WAL senders on a higher
version of PGD nodes are not expected to use LCRs due to a mismatch in protocol
versions. On a lower version of PGD nodes, WAL senders may continue to use
LCRs. Once all the PGD nodes are on the same PGD version, WAL senders use
LCRs.

A rolling upgrade starts with a cluster with all nodes at a prior release.
It then proceeds by upgrading one node at a time to the newer release, until
all nodes are at the newer release. More than two versions

> of any component must never be running at the same time. This requirement means that you must not start the new upgrade until the previous upgrade process fully finishes on all nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggests
all nodes are at the newer release. At most, two versions
of any component can be running simultaneously. This restriction means you can only start a new upgrade once the previous upgrade process fully finishes on all nodes.
```

> all nodes are at the newer release. More than two versions
> of any component must never be running at the same time. This requirement means that you must not start the new upgrade until the previous upgrade process fully finishes on all nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
all nodes are at the newer release. At most, two versions
of any component can be running simultaneously. This restriction means you can only start a new upgrade once the previous upgrade process fully finishes on all nodes.
```

An upgrade process can take more time when 
caution is required to reduce business risk. However, we don't recommend

> running the mixed versions of the software indefinitely.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
running mixed versions of the software indefinitely.
```

While you can use a rolling upgrade for upgrading a major version of the software,
we don't support mixing PostgreSQL, EDB Postgres Extended, and
EDB Postgres Advanced Server in one cluster. So you can't use this approach 
to change the Postgres variant.

!!! Warning
    Downgrades of the EDB Postgres Distributed aren't supported. They require
    that you manually rebuild the cluster.

### Rolling server software upgrades

A rolling upgrade is the process where the [server
software upgrade](#server-software-upgrade) process is performed on each node in the
cluster one after another while keeping the rest of the cluster
operating.

The actual procedure depends on whether the Postgres component is being

> upgraded to a new major version.

Reviewer: Lots of passive voice here: "is performed", "is being upgraded" - could you improve this?

During the upgrade process, you can switch the application over to a node
that's currently not being upgraded to provide continuous availability of
the database for applications.

### Rolling upgrade using node join

The other method to upgrade the server software is to join a new node
to the cluster and later drop one of the existing nodes running
the older version of the software.

For this approach, the procedure is always the same. However, because it
includes node join, a potentially large data transfer is required.

Take care not to use features that are available only in

> the newer Postgres versions until all nodes are upgraded to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the newer Postgres version until all nodes are upgraded to the
```

newer and same release of Postgres. This is especially true for any
new DDL syntax that was added to a newer release of Postgres.

!!! Note
    `bdr_init_physical` makes a byte-by-byte copy of the source node
    so you can't use it while upgrading from one major Postgres version
    to another. In fact, currently `bdr_init_physical` requires that even the
    PGD version of the source and the joining node be exactly the same.
    You can't use it for rolling upgrades by way of joining a new node method. Instead, use a logical join.

### Upgrading a CAMO-enabled cluster

Upgrading a CAMO-enabled cluster requires upgrading CAMO groups one by one while
disabling the CAMO protection for the group being upgraded and reconfiguring it
using the new [commit scope](../durability/commit-scopes)-based settings.

> The following approach is recommended for upgrading two BDR nodes that
> constitute a CAMO pair to PGD 5.0:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We recommend the following approach for upgrading two BDR nodes that
constitute a CAMO pair to PGD 5.0:
```

#### Upgrade packages

The first step in the upgrade is to install the new version of the BDR packages. This installation
installs both the new binary and the extension SQL script. This step is specific to the operating system.

#### Start Postgres

Once packages are upgraded, you can start the Postgres instance. The BDR
extension is upgraded upon start when the new binaries
detect the older version of the extension.

### Postgres upgrade

The process of in-place upgrade of Postgres depends on whether you're
upgrading to new minor version of Postgres or to a new major version of Postgres.

#### Minor version Postgres upgrade

Upgrading to a new minor version of Postgres is similar to [upgrading
the BDR extension](#bdr-extension-upgrade). Stopping Postgres, upgrading packages,
and starting Postgres again is typically all that's needed.

However, sometimes more steps, like reindexing, might be recommended for
specific minor version upgrades. Refer to the release notes of the 
version of Postgres you're upgrading to.

#### Major version Postgres upgrade

Upgrading to a new major version of Postgres is more complicated than upgrading to a minor version.

> EDB Postgres Distributed provides a bdr_pg_upgrade command line utility,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
EDB Postgres Distributed provides a `bdr_pg_upgrade` command line utility,
```

which you can use to do [in-place Postgres major version upgrades](bdr_pg_upgrade).

!!! Note
    When upgrading to a new major version of any software, including Postgres, the
    BDR extension, and others, it's always important to ensure the compatibility
    of your application with the target version of the software you're upgrading.

## Upgrade check and validation

After you upgrade your PGD node, you can verify the current
version of the binary:

```sql
SELECT bdr.bdr_version();
```

> Always check the [monitoring](../monitoring) after upgrading a node to confirm

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Always check your [monitoring](../monitoring) application after upgrading a node to confirm
```

that the upgraded node is working as expected.

## Moving from HARP to PGD Proxy

> HARP can for a time coexist with the new
> [connection management](../routing) configuration. This means you can:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HARP can coexist with the new
[connection management](../routing) configuration temporarily. This means you can:
```
